Migrating an endpoint that uses a database. (#1046)
Effect-TS/website: content/src/content/docs/learn/tutorials/first-endpoint.mdx

  return HttpServerResponse.text("ok")
}

const router = HttpRouter.empty.pipe(
  HttpRouter.get("/health", Effect.sync(health)),
)
```

What on earth are `Effect.sync` and `.pipe`?

## The Effect Type

At the core of Effect is... well, the `Effect`. You can think of an `Effect` as
a lazy computation, similar to a function that hasn't been called yet.

Here's an example of an `Effect` that returns the string `"Hello, world!"`:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"
// ---cut---
Effect.promise(async () => "Hello, world!")
```

`Effect.promise` takes a function that returns a `Promise` and creates an
`Effect` out of it. `Effect.sync` works exactly the same, except it takes a
synchronous function instead of an asynchronous one.

If we want to run this Effect, we can use `Effect.runPromise`:

```ts twoslash {2}
import { Effect } from "effect"
// ---cut---
const promise = Effect.promise(async () => "Hello, world!")
const result = await Effect.runPromise(promise);
console.log(result)
// => "Hello, world!"
```

What if you want to run an Effect that calls another Effect? You can use
`Effect.gen` to do that:

```ts twoslash {2-5}
import { Effect } from "effect"
// ---cut---

> const promise = Effect.promise(async () => "Hello, world!")

Reviewer: Might be worth renaming this from `promise` to something else to avoid a user interpreting the variable as a `Promise` instead of an `Effect`.

})
const router = HttpRouter.empty

const main = Effect.gen(function* () {
  app.use(yield* NodeHttpServer.makeHandler(router))
  app.listen(3000, () => {
    console.log("Server is running on http://localhost:3000")
  })
  yield* Effect.never
})

NodeRuntime.runMain(main)
```

And we can run the resulting code like so:

```shell showLineNumbers=false
bun index.ts
```

Our Express `/health` handler still works as expected, but we've wrapped the
Express app in a way that will allow us to define endpoints using Effect
while still responding to our existing endpoints in Express.

There's a lot of new things happening at the bottom of our file. What is
`Effect.gen`, what are those `yield*`s doing, what is `Effect.never`. For the
time being we're going to set these questions aside. It looks intimidating now,
but if you stick with this tutorial to the end, it will not only make sense, but
start to become second nature.

## Our new `/health` handler

The Effect equivalent of our Express `/health` handler looks like this:

```ts twoslash showLineNumbers=false
import { Effect } from "effect"
// ---cut---
import { HttpServerResponse } from "@effect/platform"

> const health = Effect.sync(() => {
>   return HttpServerResponse.text("ok")
> })

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const health = HttpServerResponse.text("ok")
```

I still think we should get rid of the `Effect.sync` wrapper here. It's superfluous since the code works without it, and adds one more thing you have to explain.

a lazy computation, similar to a function that hasn't been called yet.

Here's an example of an `Effect` that returns the string `"Hello, world!"`:

```ts twoslash showLineNumbers=false
import { Effect } from "effect"
// ---cut---
Effect.sync(() => "Hello, world!")
```

<Aside type="note">
Returning a static value like this isn't something you would do in practice.
The examples below are intentionally simple string manipulations to demonstrate
how to use the `Effect` type.
</Aside>

`Effect.sync` takes a function and creates an `Effect` out of it. If you need to
do asynchronous work in an Effect, you can use `Effect.promise`:

```ts twoslash showLineNumbers=false
import { Effect } from "effect"
// ---cut---
Effect.promise(async () => "Hello, world!")
```

If we want to run these Effects, we can use `Effect.runSync` and
`Effect.runPromise`:

```ts twoslash showLineNumbers=false
import { Effect } from "effect"
// ---cut---
const syncResult = Effect.runSync(
  Effect.sync(() => "Hello, world!")
)
console.log(syncResult)
// => "Hello, world!"

const asyncResult = await Effect.runPromise(
  Effect.promise(async () => "Hello, world!")
)
console.log(asyncResult)
// => "Hello, world!"

> ```

Reviewer: Despite the commentary we received, I would advocate strongly **against** showing `Effect.runSync` at all. A user shouldn't care at all about function coloring. Any `Effect` can be run with `Effect.runPromise`, and we should probably just stick to this during the tutorial.

What if you want to run an Effect that calls another Effect? You can use
`Effect.gen` to do that:

```ts twoslash showLineNumbers=false
import { Effect } from "effect"
// ---cut---
const effect = Effect.sync(() => "Hello, world!")
const gen = Effect.gen(function* () {
  const str = yield* effect
  return str.toUpperCase()
})
const result = await Effect.runPromise(gen)
console.log(result)
// => "HELLO, WORLD!"
```

> This makes use of JavaScript's [generator functions][1]. The way Effect uses
> them, if you think of an Effect as being like a `Promise`, `yield*`ing an
> `Effect` is the same as `await`ing a `Promise`.  Under the hood, all `Effect`s
> are generators, and `yield*`ing one passes it to the Effect runtime and waits
> for the result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This makes use of JavaScript's [generator functions][1]. If you think of an Effect as similar to a `Promise`, `yield*`ing an `Effect` is the same as `await`ing a `Promise`.  Under the hood, all `Effect`s are generators, and `yield*`ing one passes it to the Effect runtime and waits for the result.
```

`Effect.gen` is one of the most versatile ways to create Effects, and you'll use
it a lot. Another thing you'll see used a lot is `Effect.pipe`. Here's the same
code as above, but using `Effect.pipe`:

```ts twoslash showLineNumbers=false
import { Effect } from "effect"
// ---cut---
const effect = Effect.sync(() => "Hello, world!").pipe(
  Effect.map((s) => s.toUpperCase())
)

> const result = await Effect.runSync(effect)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const result = await Effect.runPromise(effect)
```

```ts twoslash ins={3-5} showLineNumbers=false
import { Effect } from "effect"
// ---cut---
const effect = Effect.sync(() => "Hello, world!").pipe(
  Effect.map((s) => s.toUpperCase()),
  Effect.map((s) => s.split("")),
  Effect.map((s) => s.reverse()),
  Effect.map((s) => s.join("")),
)
const result = await Effect.runSync(effect)
console.log(result)
// => "!DLROW ,OLLEH"
```

This should give us just enough to carry on with migrating our first endpoint
to Effect. As we continue through this tutorial, we'll introduce more and more
things you can do with the `Effect` type.

## Understanding `HttpRouter`

Looking back at our `HttpRouter`, we used `pipe` to add a new endpoint to our
app:

```ts twoslash showLineNumbers=false
import { HttpRouter, HttpServerResponse } from "@effect/platform"
import { Effect } from "effect"
const health = Effect.sync(() => {
  return HttpServerResponse.text("ok")
})
// ---cut---
const router = HttpRouter.empty.pipe(
  HttpRouter.get("/health", health),
)
```

`HttpRouter` is a data structure that represents a collection of routes. The
simplest router is one with no routes at all, and Effect exposes that to us as

> the `HttpRouter.empty` value. Under the hood, this is itself an `Effect`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `HttpRouter.empty` value. Under the hood, an `HttpRouter` is itself an `Effect`:
```

called it like a regular function. The following two lines of code do exactly
the same thing:

```ts twoslash showLineNumbers=false
import { HttpRouter, HttpServerResponse } from "@effect/platform"
import { Effect } from "effect"
const health = Effect.sync(() => {
  return HttpServerResponse.text("ok")
})
// ---cut---
HttpRouter.empty.pipe(HttpRouter.get("/health", health))
HttpRouter.get("/health", health)(HttpRouter.empty)
```

If we add a few more routes, we can see how this gets quickly out of hand:

```ts twoslash showLineNumbers=false
import { HttpRouter, HttpServerResponse } from "@effect/platform"
import { Effect } from "effect"
const health = Effect.sync(() => {
  return HttpServerResponse.text("ok")
})
const status = Effect.sync(() => {
  return HttpServerResponse.text("ok")
})
const version = Effect.sync(() => {
  return HttpServerResponse.text("ok")
})
// ---cut---
HttpRouter.get("/health", health)(
  HttpRouter.get("/status", status)(
    HttpRouter.get("/version", version)(
      HttpRouter.empty,
    ),
  ),
)

// vs

HttpRouter.empty.pipe(
  HttpRouter.get("/version", version),
  HttpRouter.get("/status", status),
  HttpRouter.get("/health", health),
)

> ```

Reviewer: Suggest two snippets here. The first one could leads with "... see how this gets out of hand..." and the second leads with something like "versus using `pipe`":
